Project proposal process doc (#20)
hyphacoop/handbook: projects.md

# Projects

> ## Sales leads & internal proposals

Reviewer: Think we do title case

Reviewer 2: Check out my issue comment on lead vs prospect vs opportunity. Feels like it could inform our process a bit, given that there's the distinction between _leads_ that can be totally imaginary or conceptual, vs _prospect_ where the potential client is receptive. (_opportunity_ being the final thing that our "proposal" gets us to?)

Author: Thanks for the review and @patcon for the research. See revised version.

> ## Sales leads & internal proposals

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Sales Leads & Internal Proposals
```

> While the Business Planning WG is mainly in charge of sales lead generation, all members may pursue leads as they come up. These may be a client or a grant opportunity. Members are strongly encouraged to record leads into the co-operative's [leads tracking sheet](https://link.hypha.coop/leads) whether or not we decide to pursue the opportunity.

Reviewer 2: Soon to link to be migrated to HubSpot

```suggestion
While the Business Planning WG is mainly in charge of sales lead generation, all members may pursue leads as they come up. These may be a client or a grant opportunity. Members are strongly encouraged to record leads into the co-operative's [leads tracking system](https://link.hypha.coop/leads) whether or not we decide to pursue the opportunity.
```

> Members leading a sales effort should draft an **internal proposal** and present it at a meeting to see whether the co-operative wants to move forward to submit a proposal, whether there are concerns by other members, and gauge team capacity given project timelines. A sample internal proposal should include:

Reviewer: Can we have a bulleted list here, and put the template down at the bottom?

```
# Project title

## Background
Background information about the client/grant and the project.

## Scope & timeline
What are the expected deliverables and the timeline.

## Outcomes & opportunities
How this project may be beneficial beyond the scope of the project. For example, does it lead to developing new skillsets among members or starting a relationship with a potentially long-term client?

## Skillsets
What are the important skillsets needed to ship this. If some skillsets are not available, what are the plans to source them to ensure we can deliver on this?

## Budget
Project budget and payment terms if available.

## Communication
How the logistics would look like for members working on this project. Are there weekly calls or are there physical sessions? Is the project on GitHub or is the source closed? Are there consent and confidentiality terms?

> ## Risks

Reviewer 2: +1

What are the expected risks associated with this project.

## Resources
Additional resources about the project not already listed above, such as link to a website or a call for proposal.
```

You can add more sections as appropriate for the project. This may include sample code, project roadmap, next steps, etc. You can find examples in our archived proposals folder in our [shared drive](http://link.hypha.coop/drive).

> ## Proposal drafting and submissions

Reviewer: This needs a different term if you've called an "internal proposal" above, "project brief"? "grant proposal"?

Author: Client proposal?

> Project proposals to be submitted to a potential client or grant committee should be drafted by members who expect to participate in the project with the help of members of the Business Planning WG. The WG has expertise in drafting client and grant project proposals, and managing the proposal process, so it is helpful to involve members of that group from the drafting stage. All that are involved in the proposal drafting make up the **proposal committee** that will eventually sign off on the final draft to be submitted.

Reviewer 2: Could we just say "project team" and "business planning WG" sign off? Not sure it feels worth inventing another container for people :)

Reviewer: Agree that we should be careful in language about striking new working groups and committees. I'd favour just project team (assuming the person in bizplan is a part of it by virtue of helping write it?)

Reviewer 2: Yeah, good point. Would be +1 on project team just including some member of the WG during ramp up. (and maybe ongoing as a "link" back to longer term process/learning, if we discover that makes sense)

Reviewer: agree on project team over striking a new committee

Author: Oops, didn't change them all. I think I got them all this time.

> If a project is accepted, this committee will lead the engagement meetings with the client (e.g. discuss terms of payment and project logistics) and gradually transfer the relationship entirely to the project team, which may not necessarily include everyone in the proposal committee.

Reviewer: I think we could cut most of this, also "engagement meetings" feels a little jargon-y. Can we just say meetings?

Author: >we could cut most of this

Can you specify which?

>engagement meetings

I think we should have a name for the set of meetings that are not part of billed work but are client specific and not necessarily sales meetings.

Reviewer 2: Thanks Ben.

I think I brought that "kickoff" term into circulation, but i've known it as one specific and strategic type of meeting, not all the early [unpaid] meetings with the client. Eg: https://www.google.com/search?q=kickoff+meetings

Pre-billing is often called "[initial] consultations". Kickoff meetings are often quite scripted and secret sauce that is definitely billed as part of the package. cc @uditvira 

But to channel udit: doing _something_ is priority. If you disagree with anything above, I don't care to spin wheels, and I'm sure we can cycle back later :)

> Regardless whether the proposal is successful, we should snapshot artifacts in the archived proposals folder for future reference. For failed proposals, we highly encourage reaching out the the client or grant committee for feedback and have an internal retrospective.

Reviewer 2: 💯 to followup on failures. Would even go as far as to say "always" -- no reason not to learn :)

Reviewer 2: Thoughts on my stubbing out a guide for this? (I did a bit of research, and felt like I learned some decent tactics)

Author: I think _always_ is unnecessarily restrictive. There are external factors that may lead us to not want to follow up. For example, prioritization of existing tasks.

I don't feel we need a fixed guide for this. The strategy will keep changing and fixing a document is too rigid and may get out of date. Don't want to get into a case where the practice is no longer in sync with doc.

# Projects

## Sales Prospect & Internal Proposals

> While the Business Planning WG is mainly in charge of sales lead generation, all members may pursue leads as they come up. These may be a client or a grant opportunity. Members are strongly encouraged to record leads into the co-operative's [leads tracking system](https://link.hypha.coop/leads) whether or not we want to pursue this lead.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While the Business Planning WG is mainly in charge of sales lead generation,
all members may pursue leads as they come up.
These may be a client or a grant opportunity.
Members are strongly encouraged to record leads into the co-operative's [leads tracking system](https://link.hypha.coop/leads) whether or not we want to pursue this lead.
```

- Project Title
- Background
- Scope & Timeline
- Outcomes & Opportunities
- Skillsets
- Budget
- Communication
- Risks
- Resources

A [template](#internal-proposal-template) is included below. You can add more sections as appropriate for the project. This may include sample code, project roadmap, next steps, etc. You can find examples in our archived proposals folder in our [shared drive](http://link.hypha.coop/drive).

## Client Proposal Drafting and Submissions

Project proposals to be submitted to a potential client or grant committee should be drafted by members who expect to participate in the project with the help of members of the Business Planning WG. The WG has expertise in drafting client and grant project proposals, and managing the proposal process, so it is helpful to involve members of that group from the drafting stage. All that are involved in the proposal drafting make up the **proposal team** that will eventually sign off on the final draft to be submitted.

> If a project is accepted, this team will lead the kick-off meetings with the client (e.g. discuss terms of payment and project logistics) and gradually transfer the relationship entirely to the **project team**, which may not necessarily include everyone in the proposal team.

Author: ```suggestion
If a project is accepted, this team will lead the initial consultation meetings with the client (e.g. discuss terms of payment and project logistics) and gradually transfer the relationship entirely to the **project team**, which may not necessarily include everyone in the proposal team.
```

Author: If others feel a better term please go ahead and merge their preferred term. I don't really care what to call this except it has a name.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, this is prob stuff we can sort in 5 seconds a bizdev meeting convo, not an issue. Next time I'll just flag and queue it :raised_hands:

# Projects

## Sales Prospect & Internal Proposals

While the Business Planning WG is mainly in charge of sales lead generation,
all members may pursue leads as they come up.
These may be a client or a grant opportunity.

> Members are strongly encouraged to record leads into the co-operative's [leads tracking system](https://link.hypha.coop/leads) whether or not we want to pursue this lead.

Reviewer 2: Not a blocker, but maybe a spin-out issue: Only bizdev has access, so this recommendation isn't clearly actionable atm. Potential resolutions:
- no user limit, so could just invite all members as reg (non-admin) users
- create a shared user and offer credentials
- direct people to quickly add things to `hyphacoop/organizing-private`, and someone on bizdev will worry about updating CRM
- change copy to indicate that bizdev will handle leads, just pass em on

https://knowledge.hubspot.com/settings/hubspot-user-permissions-guide

happy to punt this into organizing#147

Author: That's a logistical problem. If someone wants to enter a lead they will inquiry best way from WG. If they just want to announce a grant someone can put in for them, but if it's a client they have follow ups it may be better to make an account. Either way, I don't think that logistical issue needs to be resolved here in this doc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Members are strongly encouraged to record leads into the co-operative's [leads tracking system](https://link.hypha.coop/leads) whether or not we want to pursue this lead.
Ask Business Planning WG for help doing this. 
```

What about this?

> If a member decides to pursue a **lead**, they can reach out for preliminary discussions to see whether there is a potential to work together. If the lead expresses intention to proceed with a concrete project in mind, this becomes a **prospect**. The member now leads this sales effort and should draft an **internal proposal** and present it at a meeting to see whether the co-operative wants to move forward to submit a formal proposal to the prospective client. In this meeting, we should discuss any concerns by other members, and gauge team capacity given project timelines. A sample internal proposal should include:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a member decides to pursue a **lead**,
they can reach out for preliminary discussions to see whether there is a potential to work together.
If the lead expresses intention to proceed with a concrete project in mind,
this becomes a **prospect**.
The member now leads this sales effort and should draft an **internal proposal** and present it at a meeting to see whether the co-operative wants to move forward to submit a formal proposal to the prospective client.
In this meeting, we should discuss any concerns by other members,
and gauge team capacity given project timelines.
A sample internal proposal should include:
```

# Projects

## Sales Prospect & Internal Proposals

While the Business Planning WG is mainly in charge of sales lead generation,
all members may pursue leads as they come up.
These may be a client or a grant opportunity.
Members are strongly encouraged to record leads into the co-operative's [leads tracking system](https://link.hypha.coop/leads) whether or not we want to pursue this lead.

If a member decides to pursue a **lead**,

> they can reach out for preliminary discussions to see whether there is a potential to work together.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
they can reach out to them to see whether there's potential to work together.
```

I was at first reading this as reaching out internally to see if anyone wants to collab.

> If the lead expresses intention to proceed with a concrete project in mind,

Reviewer 2: A prospect is just willing to listen, and so you get a discovery call with them to qualify them. "intention to proceed with a concrete project in mind" seems a lot stronger than i understood it to be? You words describe a "qualified prospect" / "opportunity", I believe.

See: https://blog.hubspot.com/sales/ultimate-guide-to-sales-qualification

What about one of these:

> - If the lead _seems interested in working together_, this becomes a **prospect**.
>
> - If the lead expresses intention to proceed with a concrete project in mind, the lead becomes more **highly qualified**, becoming an **opportunity**.

Author: But you can't draft an internal proposal if someone "seems interested in working together", only when there is a specific project in mind?

Reviewer 2: Yes, then the second suggestion fits. According to your description, you wouldn't be working on a prospect if you're writing an internal proposal in your flow. Will submit PR suggestion directly

Reviewer: Agree this phrasing is awk and something in it doesn't map to my understanding of how we're using these terms

Author: This was originally not written with the "established?" sales definitions of `lead`, `prospect`, `qualified prospect`, `opportunity` and I feel like we are trying to modify the text to conform to some definition I don't have a good grasp on, and to be honest I am not sure if necessary at our stage. I will leave this language to @patcon and @dcwalk to modify as suitable.

Reviewer 2: I believe this was resolved by using "opportunity" instead of "prospect"

this becomes a **prospect**.

> The member now leads this sales effort and should draft an **internal proposal** and present it at a meeting to see whether the co-operative wants to move forward to submit a formal proposal to the prospective client.

Reviewer 2: To confirm, they lead the sales effort while maybe not having access to CRM? Does this feel ok?

- Budget
- Communication
- Risks
- Resources

A [template](#internal-proposal-template) is included below. You can add more sections as appropriate for the project. This may include sample code, project roadmap, next steps, etc. You can find examples in our archived proposals folder in our [shared drive](http://link.hypha.coop/drive).

## Client Proposal Drafting and Submissions

Project proposals to be submitted to a potential client or grant committee should be drafted by members who expect to participate in the project with the help of members of the Business Planning WG. The WG has expertise in drafting client and grant project proposals, and managing the proposal process, so it is helpful to involve members of that group from the drafting stage. All that are involved in the proposal drafting make up the **proposal team** that will eventually sign off on the final draft to be submitted.

If a project is accepted, this team will lead the initial consultation meetings with the client (e.g. discuss terms of payment and project logistics) and gradually transfer the relationship entirely to the **project team**, which may not necessarily include everyone in the proposal team.

> Regardless whether the proposal is successful, we should snapshot artifacts in the archived proposals folder for future reference. For failed proposals, we highly encourage reaching out the the client or grant committee for feedback and have an internal retrospective.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Regardless whether the proposal is successful,
we should snapshot artifacts in the archived proposals folder for future reference.
For failed proposals,
we highly encourage reaching out the the client or grant committee for feedback and have an internal retrospective.
```

# Projects

## Sales Prospect & Internal Proposals

While the Business Planning WG is mainly in charge of sales lead generation,
all members may pursue leads as they come up.

> These may be a client or a grant opportunity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

Don't think this adds values and just imposes a potentially limiting categorization

Members are strongly encouraged to record leads into the co-operative's [leads tracking system](https://link.hypha.coop/leads) whether or not we want to pursue this lead.

If a member decides to pursue a **lead**,

> they can reach out to them to see whether there's potential to work together.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
they can reach out to gauge potential interest in working together.
```

If the lead expresses intention to proceed with a concrete project in mind,

> this becomes a **prospect**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
this becomes an **opportunity**.
```

> The member now heads up this sales effort and should draft an **internal proposal** and present it at a meeting to see whether the co-operative wants to move forward to submit a formal proposal to the prospective client.

Reviewer: Didn't we talk about working with business planning wg in some fashion before bringing it to everyone.

Also, do you want to pin down as "present it at a meeting", what about time sensitive stuff? Could loomio be appropriate tool here?

In this meeting, we should discuss any concerns by other members,
and gauge team capacity given project timelines.
A sample internal proposal should include:

- Project Title
- Background
- Scope & Timeline
- Outcomes & Opportunities
- Skillsets
- Budget
- Communication
- Risks
- Resources

> A [template](#internal-proposal-template) is included below. You can add more sections as appropriate for the project. This may include sample code, project roadmap, next steps, etc. You can find examples in our archived proposals folder in our [shared drive](http://link.hypha.coop/drive).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A [template](#internal-proposal-template) is included below. You can add more sections as appropriate, including sample code, project roadmap, next steps, etc. Examples and archived proposals can be found in our [shared drive](http://link.hypha.coop/drive).
```

> ## Client Proposal Drafting and Submissions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Client Proposal Drafting and Submission
```

> Project proposals to be submitted to a potential client or grant committee should be drafted by members who expect to participate in the project with the help of members of the Business Planning WG. The WG has expertise in drafting client and grant project proposals, and managing the proposal process, so it is helpful to involve members of that group from the drafting stage. All that are involved in the proposal drafting make up the **proposal team** that will eventually sign off on the final draft to be submitted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Project proposals that will be submitted to a potential client or to a grant committee should be drafted by members who expect to participate in the project with the help of Business Planning WG. Members of the WG have expertise drafting project proposals and managing the proposal process, so it is helpful to involve them from the drafting stage. All those involved in the proposal drafting make up the **proposal team** that will eventually sign off on the final draft to be submitted.
```

Reviewer: Don't actually know if I agree on that "proposal team" comment, some folks won't draft it but might commit time and therefore should also likely sign off, for instance.

Reviewer 2: Agreed (would rather speak of "contributors" than "drafters" etc.), but I feel good about merging and looking back on this later :)

> If a project is accepted, this team will lead the initial consultation meetings with the client (e.g. discuss terms of payment and project logistics) and gradually transfer the relationship entirely to the **project team**, which may not necessarily include everyone in the proposal team.

Reviewer: Unclear the project team/proposal team division here. Per above I interpreted them to be the same

Author: For example, @benhylau and @patcon are interested to pursue a project, nobody else wanted to work on it, but @dcwalk is helping with proposal drafting because she is in bizdev wg:

- Proposal team (that signs off the proposal submission): @benhylau @patcon @dcwalk 
- Project team: @benhylau @patcon 

The project got accepted and @dcwalk is still involved in initial consultation meetings, but the goal is to transfer everything to the project team, @benhylau and @patcon 

This is also why the above section is written as it is, because the proposal team should already include the expected project team.

_If this was misunderstood, it probably means what I wrote is confusing and needs clarification in text._

Reviewer 2: My personal sense is that this was just a first pass, and it's good enough for now. (I personally hope it will become shorter and less specific as we learn!)

Regardless whether the proposal is successful,

> we should snapshot artifacts in the archived proposals folder for future reference.

Reviewer: More clear what you mean by artefacts. Would also avoid the word as seems like unneeded jargon

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the project team should add a copy to the archived proposals folder in our [shared drive](http://link.hypha.coop/drive) for future reference.
```

For failed proposals,

> we highly encourage reaching out the the client or grant committee for feedback and have an internal retrospective.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
we highly encourage reaching out the the client or grant committee for feedback and having an internal retrospective.
```

Author: Merged with @patcon 's

> we highly encourage reaching out the the client or grant committee for feedback and have an internal retrospective.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
we highly encourage reaching out to the client or grant committee for feedback and have an internal retrospective.
```
